Blog: Add entry on "Musings on Inode Watchers" (#33)
AerynOS/dotcom: src/content/docs/blog/2025/11/04/index.mdx

---
title: "Musings on Inode Watchers and Atomic Live Upgrades"
date: 2025-11-04T09:00:00Z
authors: [joebonrichie]
tags: [development]
---

## Musings on Inode Watchers and Atomic Live Updates

This blog will focus on inode watcher applications as well as the difficulties they present for a live atomic updates for our `moss` package manager.

### What is Moss?

For those not in the know `moss` is a atomic package manager that allows for live upgrades i.e. not needing to reboot to apply updates.

Although `moss` presents itself as a traditional packager manager, under the hood, it works quite fundamentally differently.

> When you install a package with moss, it actually downloads and extracts the package to a hardlink farm in `/.moss/assets`. It then constructs a new virtual filesystem in memory comparing the current state to the new state containing the additional package. From the hardlink farm it then constructs a new `/usr` tree in `.moss/root/staging/` containing the additional package. Finally it swaps the current and the new `/usr` trees with the `renameat2` syscall with the `RENAME_EXCHANGE` flag set. Finally, it archives the old `/usr` tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you install a package with moss, it actually downloads and extracts the package to a Content Addressable Store (CAS) in `/.moss/assets`. It then constructs a new virtual filesystem in memory comparing the current installed state to the new desired installed state containing the additional package. From the CAS it then constructs a `/usr` tree in `/.moss/root/staging/` containing the additional package using hardlinks into the CAS. Then, using the `renameat2` Linux kernel syscall with the `RENAME_EXCHANGE` flag set, moss atomically promotes the current `/.moss/root/staging` tree to be the new `/usr/` tree, and simultaneously demotes the current `/usr` tree back to being an inactive, numbered filesystem transaction (fstx) tree in `/.moss/root/<fstx>`. Finally, moss then updates the bootloader configuration to reference the five newest numbered filesystem transactions for rollback purposes.
```

Note: This explanation leave out a couple of details such post-install triggers and boot management.

Compared to other atomic distributions on the market, the ability to live-update without needing to reboot is an important usability requirement for us, such that is remains friendly to downstream users.

### Enter Inode Watchers

Although quite a novel approach, and, also allows atomic updates of a live system. This leaves us an interesting problem. Any running applications holding an underlying inode to a filesystem path will continue to watch the file in the archived state.

For example:

```
$ inotifywait -m /usr/bin/le-foo &
# moss remove 'binary(le-foo)'
```

In this case, if you hold an inode to a path that is deleted after the the `/usr` trees are swapped it'll continue to hold the inode to the file in the archived state e.g. `.moss/root/_state_id_/usr/bin/le-foo`. That is due to the fact the underlying hardlink file is not removed from the system and the `/usr` tree is simply archived.

For any running applications whose functionality depends on these inode watchers it can leave the system in a weird state as it does not recognise the "real path" has changed.

> The most obvious example in which this presents to users is in our GNOME Edition. GNOME Shell uses a inode watcher on `/usr/share/applications/` to watch for any changed `.desktop` files as applications get installed or removed. This design is pretty good for a traditional installation and, reduces the number of expensive stats required to see what available applications there are to launch. However, notably this design does not work with the design of `moss` and when applications are freshly installed in GNOME they simply do not show up in the application launcher as GNOME Shell instead continues to hold the inode to the archived path. e.g. `.moss/root/_state_id_/usr/share/applications/`, once a moss operation is performed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most obvious example in which this presents to users is in our GNOME Edition. GNOME Shell uses a inode watcher on `/usr/share/applications/` to watch for any changed `.desktop` files as applications get installed or removed. This design is pretty good for a traditional installation, and reduces the number of expensive `stat` calls required to see what applications are available to launch. However, notably this design does not work with the design of `moss` and when applications are freshly installed in GNOME they simply do not show up in the application launcher as GNOME Shell instead continues to hold the inode to the archived path. e.g. `.moss/root/<fstx>/usr/share/applications/`, once a mutating moss operation is performed.
```

Whilst we could patch GNOME Shell instead to `stat` for new changes in `/usr/share/applications/`, patching every application that has issues with picking up file-system changes is not feasible across the ecosystem.

### Alternative Approaches?

One suggested alternative has been to explore so called "mount-tucking" and EROFS images.

Mount-tucking is a fairly new addition to the Linux kernel where you can mount a new image _beneath_ a currently mounted image for a path.

For example
```
# mount my-image.img /mnt
# mount --beneath my-new-image.img /mnt
# umount /mnt
```

In this example, once `/mnt` is unmounted it will unmount `my-image.img` and leave `my-new-image.img` mounted in it's place. If any files from `my-image.img` are currently open then a lazy unmount of the `/mnt` path is required.

> When combined with EROFS (extended read-only filesystem), we can construct a erofs image from the new `/usr` tree instead, then mount it beneath the currently running `/usr` erofs image. Lastly, lazy unmounting the current running `/usr` image so the new image will apply. As an additional benefit it means that the `/usr` tree is also immutable whilst also remaining atomic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When combined with EROFS (extended read-only filesystem), we can construct a erofs image from the new `/usr` tree instead, then mount it beneath the currently running `/usr` erofs image. Lastly, lazy unmounting the current running `/usr` image so the new image will apply. As an additional benefit it means that the `/usr` tree is also immutable whilst still remaining atomic.

Note that this does not protect the underlying files in /.moss/ that are referenced from the erofs tree from mutation. This protection will require additional changes that are outside the scope of this blog post.
```
